There is an ongoing research program in which hyperparameters are systematically analyzed, disentangled, and in some cases removed by taking appropriate limits. How far can this program go? Can we reach zero hyperparameters, or are some hyperparameters irreducible? If we eliminate all hyperparameters, what remains?

In one representative example of this research program, the [μP](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/yang21c.html) line of work disentangles width from optimization hyperparameters and shows how, by taking a limit with the right joint scalings, to essentially remove width from the system. In another, the [central flows](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.24206) line of work demonstrates that a finite learning rate essentially amounts to a regularization on the loss Hessian. Both these analyses leave us with a simpler system than we started with, and one whose underlying dynamics are clearer. How far can we take this research agenda? Is it possible to write down a deep, nonlinear model with zero hyperparameters?

An important note here is that a typical deep neural network has many *implicit* hyperparameters that are tacitly set to one. For example, it is common to train all layers with the same learning rate, but one could in principle introduce the ratios of per-layer learning rates as new hyperparameters. A hyperparameter can always be trivially removed by setting it to one, but this is not an enlightening reduction. To complete this research program, these many implicit hyperparameters may have to be made explicit and then boiled away.
